# The Tragedy of the Lek

Greater Sage-grouse have a complex and unusual mating system known as lekking. Several males aggregate in a single location in order to attract females, whom they attempt to impress with an elaborate (and very goofy) courtship display called [strutting](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m0M8pZnNlnI). The males show a high degree of tolerance for one another, despite being in relatively close proximity with their direct competitors. However, once in a while, a fight breaks out. These fights sometimes involve a bit of wing-smacking, but more often than not, they play out as a minutes-long [face-off](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5rJgfm_eLS0), in which the opponents advance, retreat, and switch places tensely, vying for better position, but never coming into physical contact. Injuries are very rare, but these fights nonetheless bear a severe cost for the belligerents: time. While they are fighting, they aren't strutting. The females come and go meanwhile, looking for males who know how to strut their stuff.

I spent the summer of 2016 as a research assistant in an ornothology lab, watching hours upon hours of footage of a sage grouse lek, pausing the video occasionally to take a note when males copulated or fought. I noticed that the smaller males on the lek frequently picked the most fights, often even juveniles, who had no real hope of either winning mates or of winning in a physical contest against a larger, adult male. The larger males, and the ones who had the most mates, seemed content to strut all day. This observation was consistent with the theory that male-male fighting in lek-mating bird species isn't about claiming the best territory or estabilishing a pecking order for mates. Rather, males pick fights to prevent their rivals from strutting and even copulating. I hypothesized that unatractive males use fighting as a strategy to antagonize their more successful rivals in hopes of enjoying a small fraction of their redistributed would-be mates.

This "Tragedy of the Lek" became the subject of my undergraduate senior thesis. I developed a game-theory model to test the mathematical plausibility of this hypothesis. The model itself is documented in my [senior thesis](/Tragedy-of-the-Lek.pdf). The math quickly became much too complicated for me to solve analytically, so I wrote up this [R script](/three-players_v0.1.0.R) to simulate a game between three males in a lek who must choose to either strut or to fight with their neighbors in order to optimize their reproductive success with a limited pool of females. The script was designed to be run in parallel for 10,000s of combinations of model parameters (males' attractiveness) using a supercomputing cluster. v0.1.0 is the version I used for my senior thesis. I hope to refine the code in the future in order to improve the robustness of its results and hopefully make it a little speedier. So there may be future versions :crossed_fingers:

The outcome of this modeling project was a pretty cool and unexpected conclusion that group selection and female preference for cooperation play an essential role in the evolution and stability of the lek. When the skew in males' attractiveness is large, these selective pressures are necessary to protect the lek from devolving into all-out fighting, a.k.a. the Tragedy of the Lek.

## Please cite:
Klempay, B., Snow, S. S., & Prum, R. O. (2017). The Tragedy of the Lek: a game-theoretic approach to understanding
courtship disruption in male sage grouse. _Yale College senior thesis._
